# Send Time Recommendation

## Description

### <i>What is the best time to send emails to my customers in order to increase open rate?</i>

Digital Marketing is an industry that is constantly looking for ways to communicate with customers in a personalized way in order to keep them engaged with the Company. With this engagement, it is possible to increase revenue by keep people frequently spending on its products/services or even making them spend more along their relationship time with the company.

Email is one of the most used communication channel in Digital Marketing Campaigns, and people tend to open recent emails first as they are chronologically sorted, so as new incoming email arrives, the last ones are moved to the bottom or even another page of their inboxes hence it can be missed or deleted without being opened. Open rate is frequently used to measure how much of the desired audience have been reached by company’s campaigns, so **higher number of open rate means the possibility to influence more customers and drive them to a future purchase**. For this reason, finding optimal times to dispatch email notifications can place them on the top of customer's inboxes and increase the chance to open.

> For more detailed information please refer to `../documents/Send_Time_Recommendation_Report.pdf` file

### Install

This project requires **Python 3.6** and the following Python libraries installed:

- [NumPy](http://www.numpy.org/)
- [Pandas](http://pandas.pydata.org)
- [matplotlib](http://matplotlib.org/)
- [scikit-learn](http://scikit-learn.org/stable/)

You will also need to have software installed to run and execute a [Jupyter Notebook](http://ipython.org/notebook.html)

If you do not have Python installed yet, it is highly recommended that you install the [Anaconda](http://continuum.io/downloads) distribution of Python, which already has the above packages and more included. Make sure that you select the Python 3.x installer and not the Python 2.7 installer. 

### Code

The code is provided in the `../notebooks/Send_Time_Recommendation_Analysis.ipynb` notebook file and `../scripts/recommender.py`. You will also be required to use the `../datasets/sto_challenge.csv` dataset file to run the code.

### Run

In a terminal or command window, navigate to project directory `Send_Time_Recommendation/notebooks` and run one of the following commands:

```bash
ipython notebook Send_Time_Recommendation_Analysis.ipynb
```  
or
```bash
jupyter notebook Send_Time_Recommendation_Analysis.ipynb
```

This will open the Jupyter Notebook software and project file in your browser.

## Data

The dataset that will be used in this project is a set of about 315K events related to emails dispatched and their respective returns. These events are generated by each interaction of the users and collected by the CRM system, so by the time a person received and/or open an email, it generates an event with a specific action. This data is anonymized and represents real world data.

This is the data structure:
- **id:** user identify
- **timestamp:** event date and time
- **email_id:** email sent identify
- **action:** The event action

The actions can be:
- **received:** indicates that user received the email
- **open:** user opened the email
- **click:** user clicked on some link that was in email’s body
- **spamreport:** User reported spam.
- **unsubscribe:** User unsubscribe for this email

> There might be more than one event for the same user_id and
email_id, as the same user can received, open, click, report spam and unsubscribe one single email.